chore: add a development explainer (#930)
obot-platform/obot: DEVELOPMENT.md

# Developing Obot

What follows is a rundown on different ways to run and develop Obot, its UI and its tools locally.

## Running Obot

The easiest way to run Obot locally is to run `make dev`. This will launch three processes: the API server, admin UI, and user UI. Opening `http://localhost:8080/admin/` will launch the admin UI. Changing the UI code will update the UI automatically. Changing any of the Go code requires restarting the server.

## Building and Running the Obot Docker Image

Obot is ultimately packaged into an image for distribution. You can build said image with `docker build -t my-obot .`, and then run the image via `docker run -p 8080:8080 my-obot`.

## Debugging Obot

> It is possible to run the server and/or UIs in and IDE for debugging purposes. These steps layout what is necessary for Jet Brains IDEs, but an equivalent process can be used with VSCode based editors.

Reviewer: tiny nits

```suggestion
It is possible to run the server and/or UIs in and IDE for debugging purposes. These steps layout what is necessary for JetBrains IDEs, but an equivalent process can be used with VSCode-based editors.
```

Author: Done.

### Server

To run the server in GoLand:
1. Create a new "Go Build" configuration.
2. In the "Program Arguments" section, enter `server --dev-mode`.

Then you're ready to run or debug this target.

### Admin UI

> To run the Admin UI in GoLand or Web Storm:

Reviewer: tiny nit:

```suggestion
To run the Admin UI in GoLand or WebStorm:
```

Author: Done.

1. Create a new "npm" build.
2. In the "package.json" dropdown, select the `package.json` file in the `ui/admin` directory.
3. In the "Command" dropdown, select `run`.
4. In the "Scripts" dropdown, select `dev`.
5. In the "Environment" section, enter `VITE_API_IN_BROWSER=true`.

Then you're ready to run or debug this target.

### User UI

> To run the User UI in GoLand or Web Storm:

Reviewer: tiny nit:

```suggestion
To run the User UI in GoLand or WebStorm:
```

Author: Done.

1. Create a new "npm" build.
2. In the "package.json" dropdown, select the `package.json` file in the `ui/user` directory.
3. In the "Command" dropdown, select `run`.
4. In the "Scripts" dropdown, select `dev`.
5. In the "Environment" section, enter `VITE_API_IN_BROWSER=true`.

Then you're ready to run or debug this target.

## Developing Obot Tools

Obot has a set of packaged tools. These tools are in the repo `github.com/obot-platform/tools`. By default, Obot will pull the tools from this repo. However, when developing tools in this repo, you can follow these steps to use a local copy.

1. Clone `github.com/obot-platform/tools` to your local machine.
2. In the root directory of the tools repo on your local machine, run `make build`.
3. Run the Obot server, either with `make dev` or in your IDE, with the `OBOT_SERVER_TOOL_REGISTRY` environment variable set to the root directory of the tools repo.

Now, any time one of these tools is run, your local copy will be used.

> [!IMPORTANT]

> > Any time you change a Go based tool in your local repo, you must run `make build` in the tools repo for the changes to take effect with Obot.

Reviewer 2: Well I usually only build that binary specifically for the tool I care instead of building all of it.

> [!NOTE]
> Tool definitions and metadata are only synced to Obot every hour. Therefore, if you make a change to the tool in your local machine, it may not reflect immediately in Obot. Rest assured that the latest version is used when running the tool.

## Obot Server Dev Mode

In the description above for running the server in an IDE, the `--dev-mode` flag is used. This flag is also used when running the server with `make dev`. This does a few things (like turns on debug logging), the most helpful of which is to give you access to the database via `kubectl`. The kubeconfig is located at `tools/devmode-kubeconfig`.

For example, from the root directory of the obot repo, you can list all agents in your setup with `kubectl --kubeconfig tools/devmode-kubeconfig get agents`.

## Obot Credentials

> The GPTScript credentials for Obot are, by default, store in an SQLite database called `obot-credentials.db` in the root of the obot repo. You can use the `sqlite3` CLI to inspect the database directly: `sqlite3 obot-credentials.db`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The GPTScript credentials for Obot are, by default, stored in a SQLite database called `obot-credentials.db` in the root of the obot repo. You can use the `sqlite3` CLI to inspect the database directly: `sqlite3 obot-credentials.db`.
```

I know it's probably technically pronounced "S Q lite", but I'm pretty sure most people just say "sequelite".

Author: Done.
